# Chapter 1: A tutorial introduction

1. show the essential elements without getting bogged down.
2. leaves out stuff for bigger programs, pointers, structures, operators, control-flow statements, std library.

## Hello Word


```c
#include <stdio.h>

main()
{
	printf("hello, world\n");
}
```

1. compile with `gcc -o hello hello.c`
2. run with `./hello`
3. a c program consists of _functions_ and _variables_. 
4. A function contains _statements_ that specify operations. they are contained in `{}`
5. A variable stores values used during computation.
6. `main` is a special function. your program starts at `main`. every program must have a `main`
7. main usually calls other functions. some you write, some from other libs (`stdio.h` is an example, `printf` is a function from that lib.
8. to pass data between funcs, the calling function will send `arguments` to the called function
9. double quotes indicate a _character string_ or _string constant_
10. `\n` indicates newline. this is a type of _escape sequence_ others are `\t`, `\b`, `\"` `\\`.

## variables and arithmetic

1. write a program that prints a table of fahrenheit to celsius conversions

```c
#include <stdio.h>

/* print F-C table for f = 0,20,...,300 */

main()
{
	int fahr, celsius;
	int lower, upper, step;

	lower = 0;
	upper = 300;
	step = 20;

	fahr = lower;

	while (fahr <= upper) {
		celsius = 5 * (fahr-32) / 9;
		printf("%d\td%d\n", fahr, celsius);
		fahr = fahr + step;
	}
}
```
2. see comments are /* ... */  blocks. they can be multiline
3. `int fah` etc. are declarations. all variables must be declared
4. `int` is one of the basic data types, a whole value. the uppers and lowers depend on whether it's 16 or 32bit.
	a. `float` is a fractional number, with at least 6 sig figs, between +/- 10^38
	b. `char` a single byte
	c. `short` short integer
	d. `long` long integer
	e. `double` double precision float
	f. more advanced ones like array, structure, unions
	g. pointers to them, functions
5. assigment is done with `=`
6. for a single-statement `while` you don't need the `{}`.

```c
while (i < j)
	i = 2 * i;
```

7. whitespace / indendation is not respected by the compiler, but best practice should be followed for readability
8. note that we have `c = 5 * (f-32) / 9`, not `5/9 * (f-32)` is that integer division truncates, so `5/9=0`
9. the `%d` in `printf` refers to an integer. the types must match
10. to make the output prettier you could specify the length with `%3d %6d\n`
11. to use floats instead you would delcare fahr and celsius as floats, and your output thring would be `"%3.0f %6.1f\n"`
12. integers operated on together with float: int is cast to float automatically.
13. writing floats with decimals `13.0` is recommended for readability.

## for statements 
```c
#include <stdio.h>

/* print F-C table for f = 0,20,...,300 */

main()
{
	int fahr;

	for (fahr = 0; fahr <= 300; fahr = fahr + 20) {
		printf("%3d %6.1f\n", fahr, (5.0/9.0) * (fahr-32.0));
	}
}
```
1. note that the variable 'celsius' has been replaced by directly inserting the expression into the `printf` function
2. in nearly all cases you can write with either a for or while. generally prefer a for if the logic for initialise and increment is simple, since it's more compact. and keeps everything neatly packaged

## symbolic constants
1. we used hard coded number in temp conv. bad idea to bury 'magic numbers' in code. state em upfront with `#define NAME`

```c
#include <stdio.h>

#define LOWER 0
#define UPPER 300
#define STEP 20

main()
{
	int fahr;

	for (fahr = LOWER; fahr <= UPPER; fahr = fahr + STEP) {
		printf("%3d %6.1f\n", fahr, (5.0/9.0) * (fahr-32.0));
	}
}
```

## char IO
1. text IO is a stream of characters.
2. a _text stream_ is a sequence of chars divided into lines.
3. `c = getchar()` assigns the next character in a stream to c
4. `putchar(c)` prints c

## file copying
1. a program which reads a character and immediately outputs it.

```c
#include <stdio.h>

main()
{
	int c;

	c = getchar();

	while (c != EOF) {
		putchar(c);
		c = getchar();
	}
}
```
2. note we used int, rather than `char`. char is actually a special one-byte type of integer. this is because we need to handle the situation when you get to the end of the file. `getchar` returns a value called `EOF` (end of file) which is defined in stdio. so we have to use int because EOF is not a one-byte character.
3. you can make it more concise

```c
#include <stdio.h>

main()
{
	int c;

	while ((c=getchar()) != EOF) {
		putchar(c);
	}
}
```
4. here the assignment `c=getchar()` happens in the while condition
5. note we needed to put it in brackets though because of order of ops. != gets evaluated before =
